Quick Start guide (#869)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java: QUICKSTART.md

# OpenTelemetry QuickStart

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Configuration](#configuration)
    + [Sampler](#sampler)
    + [Span Processor](#span-processor)
    + [Exporter](#exporter)
- [Tracing](#tracing)
  * [Create basic Span](#create-basic-span)
  * [Create nested Spans](#create-nested-spans)
  * [Span Attributes](#span-attributes)
  * [Create Spans with events](#create-spans-with-events)
  * [Span with links](#span-with-links)
  * [Context Propagation](#context-propagation)
- [Metric](#metric)

<!-- tocstop -->

OpenTelemetry can be used to instrument code for collecting distributed traces and recording metrics.

> For more details, check out the [Overview].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, check out the [Specification Overview].
```

In the following examples, we demonstrate how to configure the OpenTelemetry SDK, create spans and record metrics through the OpenTelemetry API.

> [Overview]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/overview.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Specification Overview]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/overview.md
```

# Configuration

**Libraries** that want to export distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry must only take dependency on the `opentelemetry-api` package

> and should never configure OpenTelemetry. The configuration must be provided by **Applications** which should also depend on the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and should never configure OpenTelemetry themselves. The configuration must be provided by **Applications** which should also depend on the 
```

`opentelemetry-sdk` package, or any other implementation of the OpenTelemetry API. This way, libraries will obtain a real tracer
implementation only if the user application is instrumented. For more details, check out the [Library Guidelines].

[Library Guidelines]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/library-guidelines.md

> Configuration is performed only by user applications which should configure the exporter and may tune the OpenTelemetry behavior.

Reviewer: This kind of recites the previous paragraph.

> For example, a basic configuration instantiates the SDK tracer registry and sets to export the traces to a logging stream.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a basic configuration instantiates the SDK tracer registry and sets to export the traces to a logging stream.
```

```java
// Get the tracer
TracerSdkRegistry tracerRegistry = OpenTelemetrySdk.getTracerRegistry();

// Set to export the traces to a logging stream
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build());
```

### Sampler

It is not always feasible to trace and export every user request in an application.

> In order to strike a balance between observability and expenses, traces are sampled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to strike a balance between observability and expenses, traces can be sampled.
```

The OpenTelemetry SDK offers three samplers out of the box:
 - Always sample
 - Never sample

>  - Sampling based on probability 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Sampling based on probability
```

> Additional sampler can be provided implementing the [io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler] interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional samplers can be provided implementing the [`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`] interface.
```

```java

> TraceConfig AlwaysON = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TraceConfig AlwaysOn = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(
```

        Samplers.alwaysOn()
).build();
TraceConfig AlwaysOff = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(
        Samplers.alwaysOff()
).build();
TraceConfig half = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(
        Samplers.probability(0.5)
).build();
// Configure the sampler to use
tracerRegistry.updateActiveTraceConfig(
    half
);
```

> [io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Sampler.java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Sampler.java
```

### Span Processor

Different Span processors are offered by OpenTelemetry. 

> The `SimpleSpanProcessor` immediately forwards ended spans to the exporter, while the `BatchSpansProcessor` batches them and send them in bulk. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SimpleSpanProcessor` immediately forwards ended spans to the exporter, while the `BatchSpansProcessor` batches them and sends them in bulk.
```

> Multiple Span processors can be configured to be active at the same time using `MultiSpanProcessor`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple Span processors can be configured to be active at the same time using the `MultiSpanProcessor`.
```

```java
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(
    SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
);
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(
    BatchSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
);
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(MultiSpanProcessor.create(Arrays.asList(
            SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build(),
            BatchSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
)));
```

### Exporter

Span Processor are initialized with an exporter which is responsible to send the telemetry data to your backend of choice.
OpenTelemetry offers four exporters out of the box:

> - In Memory Exporter: keeps the data in memory, useful for debug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In-Memory Exporter: keeps the data in memory, useful for debugging.
```

- Jaeger Exporter: prepare and send the collected telemetry data to a Jaeger backend via gRPC.
- Logging Exporter: saves the telemetry data into log streams.
- OpenTelemetry Exporter: sends the data to the [OpenTelemetry Collector] (not yet implemented).

[OpenTelemetry Collector]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector

```java
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(
    InMemorySpanExporter.create()
).build());
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(
    new LoggingExporter()
).build());

ManagedChannel jaegerChannel = ManagedChannelBuilder.forAddress([ip:String], [port:int]).usePlaintext().build();
JaegerGrpcSpanExporter jaegerExporter = JaegerGrpcSpanExporter.newBuilder()
    .setServiceName("example").setChannel(jaegerChannel).setDeadline(30000)
    .build();
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(BatchSpansProcessor.newBuilder(
    jaegerExporter
).build());
```

# Tracing

In the following, we present how to trace code using the OpenTelemetry API.
**Note:** Methods of the OpenTelemetry SDK should never be called.
 

> First, the code must acquire a `tracer` which is responsible of create spans and interact with the in-process W3C trace-context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a `Tracer` must be acquired, which is responsible for creating spans and interacting with the [Context](#context-propagation).
```

> A tracer is acquired using the OpenTelemetry API specifying name and version parameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tracer is acquired using the OpenTelemetry API by specifying the name and version of the library instrumenting the library or application to be monitored.
```

> More information are available in [Obtaining a Tracer].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information is available in the specification chapter [Obtaining a Tracer].
```

```java
Tracer tracer = OpenTelemetry.getTracerRegistry().get("instrumentation-library-name","semver:1.0.0");
```

[Obtaining a Tracer]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/api-tracing.md#obtaining-a-tracer

## Create basic Span

> To create a basic span, you only need to specify the name of the span. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a basic span, you only need to specify the name of the span.
```

> Starting/Ending time and tracing-context are provided automatically by the OpenTelemetry API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The start and end time of the span is automatically set by the OpenTelemetry SDK.
```

```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("SpanName").startSpan();
// your use case
...
span.end();
```

## Create nested Spans

> Most of the time, we want to correlate spans for nested operations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, we want to correlate spans for nested operations.
```

> OpenTelemetry supports distributed tracing within process and remote processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry supports distributed tracing within processes and across remote processes.
```

nit: I don't know the exact definition but I don't think intra-process tracing qualifies as Distributed Tracing, that's only about inter-process calls.

For more details how to share context between remote processes, see [Context Propagation](#context-propagation).

> ```java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a method `A` calling a method `B`, the spans could be manually linked in the following way:

```java
```

> Span childLocalParent = tracer.spanBuilder("Child").setParent(parentSpan).startSpan();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
void a() {
  parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  b();
  parentSpan.end();
}
void b() {
  Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b").setParent(parentSpan).startSpan();
  // do stuff
  childSpan.end();
}
```

And here it should be mentioned that one would usually "activate" the span using `Scope scope = tracer.withSpan(parentSpan)` to automatically propagate the parentSpan. Otherwise the parent would have to be kept somewhere accessible by or manually passed to `B`.

Span childRemoteParent = tracer.spanBuilder("Child").setParent(remoteContext).startSpan();
```

## Span Attributes
In OpenTelemetry spans can be created freely and it’s up to the implementor to annotate them with attributes specific to the represented operation. 

> Attributes provide additional context on span to the specific operation it tracks, such as results or operation properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attributes provide additional context on a span to the specific operation it tracks, such as results or operation properties.
```

```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource/path").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.CLIENT).startSpan();
span.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
span.setAttribute("http.url", url.toString());
```

Some of these operations represent calls that use well-known protocols like HTTP or database calls. 

> For these, OpenTelemetry requires specific attributes to be set. To see more, please refer to the [Semantic Convention].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these, OpenTelemetry requires specific attributes to be set. These are defined in the [Semantic Conventions] in the cross-language specification.
```

> [Semantic Convention]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/data-semantic-conventions.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Semantic Conventions]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/data-semantic-conventions.md
```

## Create Spans with events

Spans can be annotated with named events that can carry zero or more [Span Attributes](#span-attributes),
each of which is itself a key:value map paired automatically with a timestamp.

```java
span.addEvent("Init");
...
span.addEvent("End");
```
```java
Map<String, AttributeValue> eventAttributes = new HashMap<>();
eventAttributes.put("key", AttributeValue.stringAttributeValue("value"));
eventAttributes.put("result", AttributeValue.longAttributeValue(0L));

span.addEvent("End Computation", eventAttributes);
```

> ## Span with links

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create Spans with links
```

> A Span may be linked to zero or more other Spans that are causally related. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Span may be linked to zero or more other Spans that are causally related.
```

Links can be used to represent batched operations where a Span was initiated by multiple initiating Spans, each representing a single incoming item being processed in the batch.

```java
Link link1 = SpanData.Link.create(parentSpan1.getContext());
Link link2 = SpanData.Link.create(parentSpan2.getContext());
Span child = tracer.spanBuilder("childWithLink")
        .addLink(link1)
        .addLink(link2)
        .addLink(parentSpan3.getContext())
        .addLink(remoteContext)
    .startSpan();
```

For more details how to read context from remote processes, see [Context Propagation](#context-propagation).

## Context Propagation

> OpenTelemetry provides a text based approach to propagate the W3C trace-context with remote processes by instrumenting the transport-layer operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry provides a text-based approach to propagate context to remote services using the [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) HTTP headers.
```

The following presents an example of an outgoing HTTP request using `HttpURLConnection`.
 
```java
// Tell OpenTelemetry to inject the context in the HTTP headers
HttpTextFormat.Setter<HttpURLConnection> setter =
  new HttpTextFormat.Setter<HttpURLConnection>() {
    @Override
    public void put(HttpURLConnection carrier, String key, String value) {

>         //Insert the context as Header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Insert the context as Header
```

        carrier.setRequestProperty(key, value);
    }
};

URL url = new URL("http://127.0.0.1:8080/resource");
Span outGoing = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.CLIENT).startSpan();

> // Semantic Convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Add the attributes defined in the Semantic Conventions
```

outGoing.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
outGoing.setAttribute("http.url", url.toString());
HttpURLConnection transportLayer = (HttpURLConnection) url.openConnection();
// Inject the request with the context
tracer.getHttpTextFormat().inject(outGoing.getContext(), transportLayer, setter);
// Make outgoing call
...
```

> Similarly, the text based approach can be used to read the W3C trace-context from incoming requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the text-based approach can be used to read the W3C Trace Context from incoming requests.
```

The following presents an example of processing an incoming HTTP request using `HttpExchange`.
```java
HttpTextFormat.Getter<HttpExchange> getter =
  new HttpTextFormat.Getter<HttpExchange>() {
    @Override
    public String get(HttpExchange carrier, String key) {
      if (carrier.getRequestHeaders().containsKey(key)) {
        return carrier.getRequestHeaders().get(key).get(0);
      }

>       return "";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      return null;
```

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/context_prop/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/context/propagation/HttpTextFormat.java#L120

    }
};
...
public void handle(HttpExchange he) {
    // Extract the context from the request
    SpanContext ctx = tracer.getHttpTextFormat().extract(he, getter);
    Span serverSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("/resource").setSpanKind(Span.Kind.SERVER)
        .setParent(ctx)
        .startSpan();

>     // Semantic Convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Add the attributes defined in the Semantic Conventions
```

    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.method", "GET");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.scheme", "http");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.host", "localhost:8080");
    serverSpan.setAttribute("http.target", "/resource");
    // Serve the request
    ...
    serverSpan.end();
}
```

> # Metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Metrics
```

# OpenTelemetry QuickStart

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Configuration](#configuration)
    + [Sampler](#sampler)
    + [Span Processor](#span-processor)
    + [Exporter](#exporter)
- [Tracing](#tracing)
  * [Create basic Span](#create-basic-span)
  * [Create nested Spans](#create-nested-spans)
  * [Span Attributes](#span-attributes)
  * [Create Spans with events](#create-spans-with-events)
  * [Create Spans with links](#create-spans-with-links)
  * [Context Propagation](#context-propagation)
- [Metrics](#metrics)

<!-- tocstop -->

OpenTelemetry can be used to instrument code for collecting distributed traces and recording metrics.

> For more details, check out the [Specification Overview].

Reviewer 2: link needed?

Reviewer 2: nm. I didn't know you could do this with markdown.

In the following examples, we demonstrate how to configure the OpenTelemetry SDK, create spans and record metrics through the OpenTelemetry API.

[Specification Overview]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/overview.md

# Configuration

> **Libraries** that want to export distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry must only take dependency on the `opentelemetry-api` package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Libraries** that want to export distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry only need a dependency on the `opentelemetry-api` package
```

Reviewer: I think the intent was to make clear its discouraged (or even prohibited by the spec) to access the SDK as an instrumenting library as only the application should set that up.

and should never configure OpenTelemetry themselves. The configuration must be provided by **Applications** which should also depend on the 
`opentelemetry-sdk` package, or any other implementation of the OpenTelemetry API. This way, libraries will obtain a real tracer

> implementation only if the user application is instrumented. For more details, check out the [Library Guidelines].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implementation only if the user application is configured for it. For more details, check out the [Library Guidelines].
```

> implementation only if the user application is instrumented. For more details, check out the [Library Guidelines].

Reviewer 2: link needed

[Library Guidelines]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/library-guidelines.md

> The configuration should set up the exporter and may tune the OpenTelemetry behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration should install a span processor with an exporter and may customize the behavior of the OpenTelemetry SDK.
```

> The configuration install a span processor with an exporter and may customize the behavior of the OpenTelemetry SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application has to install a span processor with an exporter and may customize the behavior of the OpenTelemetry SDK.
```

For example, a basic configuration instantiates the SDK tracer registry and sets to export the traces to a logging stream.

```java
// Get the tracer
TracerSdkRegistry tracerRegistry = OpenTelemetrySdk.getTracerRegistry();

// Set to export the traces to a logging stream
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build());
```

### Sampler

It is not always feasible to trace and export every user request in an application.
In order to strike a balance between observability and expenses, traces can be sampled. 

The OpenTelemetry SDK offers three samplers out of the box:
 - Always sample
 - Never sample
 - Sampling based on probability

Additional samplers can be provided implementing the [`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`] interface.

```java

> TraceConfig AlwaysOn = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TraceConfig alwaysOn = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(
```

        Samplers.alwaysOn()
).build();

> TraceConfig AlwaysOff = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TraceConfig alwaysOff = TraceConfig.getDefault().toBuilder().setSampler(
```

```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("SpanName").startSpan();
// your use case
...
span.end();
```

## Create nested Spans

Most of the time, we want to correlate spans for nested operations.
OpenTelemetry supports tracing within processes and across remote processes.
For more details how to share context between remote processes, see [Context Propagation](#context-propagation).

For a method `A` calling a method `B`, the spans could be manually linked in the following way:
```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  b(parentSpan);
  parentSpan.end();
}
void b(Span parentSpan) {
  Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b").setParent(parentSpan).startSpan();
  // do stuff
  childSpan.end();
}
```
Since it is not always possible to change a method signature or rely on global variables, the OpenTelemetry API
offers an automated way to propagate the `parentSpan`:
```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  try(Scope scope = tracer.withSpan(parentSpan)){
    b();
  } finally {
    parentSpan.end();
  }
}
void b() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.getCurrentSpan();

>   Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b").setParent(parentSpan).startSpan();

Reviewer: The trick is that this actually happens implicitly. `setParent` is only used to override the default behavior of taking the current ("active") span.

Author: The more you know :smile:

# OpenTelemetry QuickStart

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Configuration](#configuration)
    + [Sampler](#sampler)
    + [Span Processor](#span-processor)
    + [Exporter](#exporter)
- [Tracing](#tracing)
  * [Create basic Span](#create-basic-span)
  * [Create nested Spans](#create-nested-spans)
  * [Span Attributes](#span-attributes)
  * [Create Spans with events](#create-spans-with-events)
  * [Create Spans with links](#create-spans-with-links)
  * [Context Propagation](#context-propagation)
- [Metrics](#metrics)

<!-- tocstop -->

> OpenTelemetry can be used to instrument code for collecting distributed traces and recording metrics.

Reviewer 3: "for collection telemetry data" maybe?

For more details, check out the [Specification Overview].

> In the following examples, we demonstrate how to configure the OpenTelemetry SDK, create spans and record metrics through the OpenTelemetry API.

Reviewer 4: Maybe leave metrics for another PR (unless you're planning to fill out the TODO at the bottom in this one).

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: @bogdandrutu is working on finishing the implementation of the Metric part. I will provide a follow up PR that addresses the metric part soon :wink:

Reviewer 3: @thisthat thanks!

> [Specification Overview]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/overview.md

Reviewer 3: Not sure we want end users to refer to the actual Specification - maybe put it at the end, in a "Resources" list?

Author: I agree that specification should not be part of this document, but this is the overview of the overall project. Maybe linking the openteletry website?

Reviewer 3: I'd be fine with that, yes.

# Configuration

> **Libraries** that want to export distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry only need a dependency on the `opentelemetry-api` package

Reviewer 3: "telemetry data" is probably better here, as `opentelemetry-api` includes also metrics and correlation context.

and should never configure OpenTelemetry themselves. The configuration must be provided by **Applications** which should also depend on the 
`opentelemetry-sdk` package, or any other implementation of the OpenTelemetry API. This way, libraries will obtain a real tracer
implementation only if the user application is configured for it. For more details, check out the [Library Guidelines].

[Library Guidelines]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/library-guidelines.md

> The application has to install a span processor with an exporter and may customize the behavior of the OpenTelemetry SDK.

Reviewer 4: May want to note that this configuration info only applies to the SDK provided by `opentelemetry-sdk` since you mention "any other implementation" above. E.g. there's no `updateActiveTraceConfig` in the API package, and other SDKs are free to offer different configuration options.

For example, a basic configuration instantiates the SDK tracer registry and sets to export the traces to a logging stream.

```java

> // Get the tracer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// Initialize the tracer registry
```

Since it's the registry that gets configured, not the tracer.

Reviewer 3: I like `Get the Tracer` more ;) (the tracer provider/registry *may* have been already initialized)

TracerSdkRegistry tracerRegistry = OpenTelemetrySdk.getTracerRegistry();

// Set to export the traces to a logging stream

> tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build());

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer to have this split among different lines, instead of a single long one (better readability).

```

### Sampler

It is not always feasible to trace and export every user request in an application.

> In order to strike a balance between observability and expenses, traces can be sampled. 

Reviewer 4: It might be helpful to link to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/sdk-tracing.md#sampling here, but even that doc doesn't make it clear what happens to non-sampled traces (don't get exported, don't accept events, etc.).

Reviewer 3: I very personally feel actual documentation (once we have an actual OTel website) could be better than the actual Specification, as it might be too dense for end users, as commented before.

The OpenTelemetry SDK offers three samplers out of the box:

>  - Always sample

Reviewer 4: There are a few places it would be helpful to link to e.g. javadocs, where the behavior isn't obvious from the name alone. This one looks like it could benefit from some links to me, e.g.:

- [`AlwaysOnSampler`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/9e1882f06a30fe092dbe2566287eedd196fe5a20/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Samplers.java#L81-L105), which samples every trace regardless of upstream sampling decisions.
- [`AlwaysOffSampler`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/9e1882f06a30fe092dbe2566287eedd196fe5a20/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Samplers.java#L107-L131), which doesn't sample any trace, regardless of upstream sampling decisions.
- [`Probability`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/9e1882f06a30fe092dbe2566287eedd196fe5a20/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Samplers.java#L133-L203) which samples a configurable percentage of traces, and additionally samples any trace that was sampled upstream.

I linked to the source here since AFAICT there aren't hosted docs I can link to.

 - Never sample
 - Sampling based on probability

> Additional samplers can be provided implementing the [`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`] interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Additional samplers can be provided by implementing the [`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`] interface.
```

).build();
// Configure the sampler to use
tracerRegistry.updateActiveTraceConfig(
    half
);
```

[`io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.Sampler`]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/Sampler.java

### Span Processor

Different Span processors are offered by OpenTelemetry. 
The `SimpleSpanProcessor` immediately forwards ended spans to the exporter, while the `BatchSpansProcessor` batches them and sends them in bulk.
Multiple Span processors can be configured to be active at the same time using the `MultiSpanProcessor`.

```java
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(
    SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
);
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(
    BatchSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
);
tracerRegistry.addSpanProcessor(MultiSpanProcessor.create(Arrays.asList(
            SimpleSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build(),
            BatchSpansProcessor.newBuilder(new LoggingExporter()).build()
)));
```

### Exporter

Span Processor are initialized with an exporter which is responsible to send the telemetry data to your backend of choice.

> OpenTelemetry offers four exporters out of the box:

Reviewer 2: Let's also add a link over to the OpenTelemetry registry to find other java exporters.

https://opentelemetry.io/registry/?s=exporter

Author: Nice idea!

More information is available in the specification chapter [Obtaining a Tracer].

```java
Tracer tracer = OpenTelemetry.getTracerRegistry().get("instrumentation-library-name","semver:1.0.0");
```

[Obtaining a Tracer]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/api-tracing.md#obtaining-a-tracer

## Create basic Span
To create a basic span, you only need to specify the name of the span.
The start and end time of the span is automatically set by the OpenTelemetry SDK.
```java
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("SpanName").startSpan();
// your use case
...
span.end();
```

## Create nested Spans

Most of the time, we want to correlate spans for nested operations.
OpenTelemetry supports tracing within processes and across remote processes.
For more details how to share context between remote processes, see [Context Propagation](#context-propagation).

For a method `A` calling a method `B`, the spans could be manually linked in the following way:
```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  b(parentSpan);
  parentSpan.end();
}
void b(Span parentSpan) {

>   Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b").setParent(parentSpan).startSpan();

Reviewer 3: It would also be nice to split this line here (and other relatively long lines).

  // do stuff
  childSpan.end();
}
```

> Since it is not always possible to change a method signature or rely on global variables, the OpenTelemetry API

Reviewer 4: This line makes it sound like the example above is standard practice, instead of just here to demonstrate the mechanics of implicit context propagation.

Reviewer 3: Agreed on this!

offers an automated way to propagate the `parentSpan`:
```java
void a() {
  Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("a").startSpan();
  try(Scope scope = tracer.withSpan(parentSpan)){
    b();
  } finally {
    parentSpan.end();
  }
}
void b() {
  Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("b")
     // NOTE: setParent(parentSpan) is not required anymore, 
     // `tracer.getCurrentSpan()` is automatically added as parent
    .startSpan();
  ...
  childSpan.end();
}
``` 

To link spans from remote processes, it is sufficient to set the [Remote Context](#context-propagation) as parent. 
```java
Span childRemoteParent = tracer.spanBuilder("Child").setParent(remoteContext).startSpan();
```

## Span Attributes

> In OpenTelemetry spans can be created freely and it’s up to the implementor to annotate them with attributes specific to the represented operation. 

Author: Left-hand quote :smile:
